Update Working with Dependencies -> Declaring Repositories Section (#30525)
gradle/gradle: platforms/documentation/docs/src/docs/userguide/dep-man/declaring-repositories/supported_metadata_formats.adoc

// Copyright (C) 2023 Gradle, Inc.
//
// Licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution-Noncommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License.;
// you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
// You may obtain a copy of the License at
//
//      https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/
//
// Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
// distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
// WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
// See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
// limitations under the License.

[[declaring-repositories]]
= Metadata Formats

> Metadata refers to the information associated with a module or dependency that describes its characteristics, relationships, and requirements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Dependency metadata refers to the information associated with a dependency that describes its characteristics, relationships, and requirements.
```

This metadata includes details such as:

> 1. **Module Identity**: The group, name, and version (GAV) coordinates that uniquely identify the module.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Identity**: Module dependencies are uniquely identified by their group, name, and version (GAV) coordinates.
```

Eventually Gradle will likely support coordinate systems other than GAV. I think this wording is more inclusive to that future

Author: Done.

> 2. **Dependencies**: A list of other modules or libraries that this module depends on, including their versions and configurations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. **Dependencies**: A list of other binaries that this dependency requires, including their versions.
```

Author: Done.

> 3. **Variants**: Different forms of the module (e.g., API, implementation, runtime) that can be consumed or resolved based on the context.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. **Variants**: Different forms of the component (e.g., compile, runtime, apiElements, runtimeElements) that can be consumed in different contexts.
```

Author: Done.

> 4. **Artifacts**: The actual files (like JARs, ZIPs, etc.) produced by the module, which may include compiled code, resources, or documentation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. **Artifacts**: The actual files (like JARs, ZIPs, etc.) produced by the component, which may include compiled code, resources, or documentation.
```

> 5. **Capabilities**: Describes the functionality or features that a module provides or consumes, helping to avoid conflicts when different modules provide the same capability.

Reviewer: I think we should either include attributes here too, or honestly just gloss over capabilities and not include this bullet point

> This metadata is typically stored in files like `pom.xml` for Maven or `ivy.xml` for Ivy, and Gradle can also generate and consume metadata in its own format, called Gradle Module Metadata (GMM).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Depending on the repository type, dependency metadata are stored in different formats:

- **Gradle** Gradle Module Metadata (`.module`) files
- **Maven* POM (`pom.xml`) files
- **Ivy** Ivy Descriptor (`ivy.xml`) files

Some repositories may contain multiple types of metadata for a single component. 
When Gradle publishes to a Maven repository, it publishes both a Gradle Module Metadata (GMM) files and a Maven POM file.

```

Author: Done.

> This metadata plays a crucial role in dependency resolution, ensuring that the right versions and variants of modules are used in a build.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This metadata plays a crucial role in dependency resolution, by allowing the dependencies of binary artifacts to be tracked alongside the artifact itself. 
By reading dependency metadata, Gradle is able to determine which versions of other artifacts a given dependency requires.
```

Author: Done.

[[sec:supported-metadata-formats]]
== Supported metadata formats

> External module dependencies require module metadata so that Gradle can determine the transitive dependencies of a module.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
External dependencies require metadata so that Gradle can determine their transitive dependencies.
```

I'd prefer to avoid using the module term, as it can be quite overloaded

Author: Done.

Gradle supports various metadata formats to achieve this.

[[sub:supported-md-gradle]]
=== Gradle Module Metadata (GMM) files

Gradle Module Metadata is specifically designed to support all features of Gradle's dependency management model, making it the preferred format.

You can find the https://github.com/gradle/gradle/blob/master/platforms/documentation/docs/src/docs/design/gradle-module-metadata-latest-specification.md[specification here].

[source,json]
----
{
  "formatVersion": "1.1",
  "component": {
    "group": "com.example",
    "module": "my-library",
    "version": "1.0"
  }
}
----

[[sub:supported-md-pom]]
=== POM files

Gradle natively supports https://maven.apache.org/pom.html[Maven POM files].
By default, Gradle will first look for a POM file.
However, if the file contains a special marker, Gradle will use <<#sub:supported-md-gradle, Gradle Module Metadata>> instead.

[source,xml]
----
<project xmlns="http://maven.apache.org/POM/4.0.0">
  <modelVersion>4.0.0</modelVersion>
  <groupId>com.example</groupId>
  <artifactId>my-library</artifactId>
  <version>1.0</version>
</project>
----

[[sub:supported-md-ivy]]
=== Ivy files

> Gradle also supports http://ant.apache.org/ivy/[Apache Ivy metadata files].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Gradle also supports http://ant.apache.org/ivy/[Ivy descriptor files].
```

Author: Done.

Gradle will first look for an `ivy.xml` file, but if this file contains a special marker, it will use <<#sub:supported-md-gradle, Gradle Module Metadata>> instead.

[source,xml]
----
<ivy-module version="2.0">
  <info organisation="com.example" module="my-library" revision="1.0"/>
  <dependencies>
    <dependency org="org.example" name="dependency" rev="1.2"/>
  </dependencies>
</ivy-module>
----

[[sec:supported_metadata_sources]]
== Supported metadata sources

> When searching for a module in a repository, Gradle checks for supported metadata file formats by default.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When searching for a component in a repository, Gradle checks for supported metadata file formats by default.
```

Author: Done.

In a Maven repository, Gradle looks for `.pom` files.
In an Ivy repository, it checks for `ivy.xml` files.
And in a flat directory repository, it looks directly for `.jar` files without expecting any metadata.

> Starting with Gradle 5.0, Gradle also looks for `.module` (Gradle module metadata) files.

Reviewer: I don't think we need to say "Staring in Gradle 5.0". This has been the default for a while.

I also think we should order this list in: GMM, POM, Ivy, Flat

Author: Done.

If you define a custom repository, you can configure how Gradle searches for metadata.

> For instance, you can set up a Maven repository that only contains JAR files without POM files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For instance, you can set up a Maven repository will optionally resolve JARs that don't have associated POM files
```

This more specifically describes what the below sample does

Author: Done.

This is done by configuring metadata sources for the repository:

====
include::sample[dir="snippets/artifacts/defineRepository/kotlin",files="build.gradle.kts[tags=maven-repo-with-metadata-sources]"]
include::sample[dir="snippets/artifacts/defineRepository/groovy",files="build.gradle[tags=maven-repo-with-metadata-sources]"]
====

You can specify multiple metadata sources, and Gradle will search through them in a predefined order.
The following metadata sources are supported:

[%header%autowidth,compact]
|===

> | Metadata source | Description | Order | Maven | Ivy / flat dir

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Metadata source | Description | Default Order | Maven | Ivy / flat dir
```

Author: Done.

| `gradleMetadata()`
| Look for Gradle `.module` files
| 1st
| yes
| yes

| `mavenPom()`
| Look for Maven `.pom` files
| 2nd
| yes
| yes

| `ivyDescriptor()`
| Look for `ivy.xml` files
| 2nd
| no
| yes

| `artifact()`

> | Look directly for artifact

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Look directly for artifact without associated metadata
```

Author: Done.

| 3rd
| yes
| yes
|===

> The default behavior for Ivy and Maven repositories has changed with Gradle 6.0, where `artifact()` is no longer included by default, improving efficiency when modules are missing.
> 
> To restore the old behavior or configure new behavior in older Gradle versions, you can specify the metadata sources explicitly:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, Gradle will require that a dependency has associated metadata. 
To relax this requirement and allow Gradle to resolve artifacts without associated metadata, specify the `artifact` metadata source:
```

Author: Done.

[source,kotlin]
----
mavenCentral {
    metadataSources {
        mavenPom()
        artifact()
    }
}

> ----

Reviewer: ```suggestion
----

The above example instructs Gradle to first look for component metadata from a POM file, and if not present, to derive metadata from the artifact itself. 
```

Author: Done.

> Since Gradle 5.3, when parsing metadata files (Ivy or Maven), Gradle checks for a marker that indicates the presence of a matching Gradle Module Metadata file.

Reviewer: Again, I don't think we really need to have the version numbers in here. This has been the behavior for a long time.

Author: Done.
